# Control Props

## ðŸ“ Takeaways

The __Control Props Pattern__ allows users to completely control
state values within your component. This differs from the state reducer pattern in the fact that you can not only change the state changes based on actions dispatched but you _also_ can trigger state changes from outside the component or hook as well.

Just to make it clear for myself.

### Action

An action is an object that has two properties: a string `type` and optionally a `payload` object that can be used to update the `state`.

### Reducer

A reducer mostly takes two arguments: (current) `state` and `action`. It takes the (current) `state` and calculates and returns the new state. The new state is calculated by applying the passed in `action` based on its `action type` and evt. `action payload` .

### Dispatch

A `dispatch` function is a way to trigger state changes in an application, often in response to user actions or other events. The `dispatch` function accepts `action` as an argument and calls the `reducer` with `currentState` and this `action`. It gets its `reducer` from within the scope of the `useReducer` hook or the `state store`.

With the Context API, we typically define a `state object` and a set of functions that can be used to `update` that state. The `dispatch` function is then created as a function that calls one of these update functions based on the action that is dispatched.

### useReducer

A `useReducer` React hook is a function that accepts a `reducer` function and optionally the `initialState` as its arguments and returns the current `state` and the `dispatch` function that can be used to update the `state`.

### On aliasses

It is quite exciting to watch how KCD uses the alias `controlledOn` in different places. E.g. in the `Toggle` component and `useToggle` hook. By using aliasses we can avoid shadowing variables that were declared somewhere in the upper scope.

In `useToggle`, we get the `on` argument passed in. At the same time, inside `useToggle` we create a new `on` variable which becomes the block scoped variable for the whole function. Moreover, we want to create our new `on` variable based on the one passed in and also `state.on`. To avoid name conflicts, we have created the `controlledOn` alias.

In `Toggle`, we also alias the input `on` argument with `controlledOn`. That is necessary because we pass it as an `on` argument into `useToggle`, but `useToggle` also returns an `on` variable, which is a different variable with the same name.

NOTE:
> If we use `on: controlledOn` to define a function argument, `controlledOn` is an __alias__ for `on`. (See how it being defined on the `Toggle` component.)
>
> If we use `on: controlledOn` in the function call, `controlledOn` is a  __value__ of the `on` argument, not its alias. (See how `useToggle` function is being called inside the `Toggle` function.)

## Background

**One liner:** The Control Props pattern allows users to completely control
state values within your component. This differs from the state reducer pattern in the fact that you can not only change the state changes based on actions dispatched but you _also_ can trigger state changes from outside the component or hook as well.

Sometimes, people want to be able to manage the internal state of our component from the outside. The state reducer allows them to manage what state changes are made when a state change happens, but sometimes people may want to make state changes themselves. We can allow them to do this with a feature called "Control Props."

This concept is basically the same as controlled form elements in React that you've probably used many times:
ðŸ“œ https://reactjs.org/docs/forms.html#controlled-components

```javascript
function MyCapitalizedInput() {
  const [capitalizedValue, setCapitalizedValue] = React.useState('')

  return (
    <input
      value={capitalizedValue}
      onChange={e => setCapitalizedValue(e.target.value.toUpperCase())}
    />
  )
}
```

In this case, the "component" that's implemented the "control props" pattern is the `<input />`. Normally it controls state itself (like if you render `<input />` by itself with no `value` prop). But once you add the `value` prop, suddenly the `<input />` takes the back seat and instead makes "suggestions" to you via the `onChange` prop on the state updates that it would normally make itself.

This flexibility allows us to change how the state is managed (by capitalizing the value), and it also allows us to programmatically change the state whenever we want to, which enables this kind of synchronized input situation:

```javascript
function MyTwoInputs() {
  const [capitalizedValue, setCapitalizedValue] = React.useState('')
  const [lowerCasedValue, setLowerCasedValue] = React.useState('')

  function handleInputChange(e) {
    setCapitalizedValue(e.target.value.toUpperCase())
    setLowerCasedValue(e.target.value.toLowerCase())
  }

  return (
    <>
      <input value={capitalizedValue} onChange={handleInputChange} />
      <input value={lowerCasedValue} onChange={handleInputChange} />
    </>
  )
}
```

**Real World Projects that use this pattern:**

- [downshift](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift)
- [`@reach/listbox`](https://reacttraining.com/reach-ui/listbox)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://advanced-react-patterns.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/06.js)
- [Final](http://advanced-react-patterns.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.js)

In this exercise, we've created a `<Toggle />` component which can accept a prop
called `on` and another called `onChange`. These work similar to the `value` and
`onChange` props of `<input />`. Your job is to make those props actually
control the state of `on` and call the `onChange` with the suggested changes.

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ add read only warning

[Production deploy](http://advanced-react-patterns.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-1.js)

Take a look at the example in `./src/examples/warnings.js` (you can pull it up
at
[/isolated/examples/warnings.js](http://localhost:3000/isolated/examples/warnings.js)).

Notice the warnings when you click the buttons. You should see the following
warnings all related to controlled inputs:

```
Warning: Failed prop type: You provided a `value` prop to a form field without an `onChange` handler. This will render a read-only field. If the field should be mutable use `defaultValue`. Otherwise, set either `onChange` or `readOnly`.
```

```
Warning: A component is changing an uncontrolled input of type undefined to be controlled. Input elements should not switch from uncontrolled to controlled (or vice versa). Decide between using a controlled or uncontrolled input element for the lifetime of the component. More info: https://fb.me/react-controlled-components
```

```
Warning: A component is changing a controlled input of type undefined to be uncontrolled. Input elements should not switch from controlled to uncontrolled (or vice versa). Decide between using a controlled or uncontrolled input element for the lifetime of the component. More info: https://fb.me/react-controlled-components
```

We should issue the same warnings for people who misuse our controlled props:

1. Passing `on` without `onChange`
2. Passing a value for `on` and later passing `undefined` or `null`
3. Passing `undefined` or `null` for `on` and later passing a value

For this first extra credit, create a warning for the read-only situation (the
other extra credits will handle the other cases).

ðŸ’° You can use the `warning` package to do this:

```javascript
warning(doNotWarn, 'Warning message')

// so:
warning(false, 'This will warn')
warning(true, 'This will not warn')
```

A real-world component that does this is
[`@reach/listbox`](https://reacttraining.com/reach-ui/listbox/)

### 2. ðŸ’¯ add a controlled state warning

[Production deploy](http://advanced-react-patterns.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-2.js)

With that read-only warning in place, next try and add a warning for when the
user changes from controlled to uncontrolled or vice-versa.

### 3. ðŸ’¯ extract warnings to a custom hook

[Production deploy](http://advanced-react-patterns.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-3.js)

Both of those warnings could be useful anywhere so let's go ahead and make a
custom hook for them.

Shout out to the Reach UI team for
[the implementation of the `useControlledSwitchWarning`](https://github.com/reach/reach-ui/blob/a376daec462ccb53d33f4471306dff35383a03a5/packages/utils/src/index.tsx#L407-L443)

### 4. ðŸ’¯ don't warn in production

[Production deploy](http://advanced-react-patterns.netlify.app/isolated/final/06.extra-4.js)

Runtime warnings are helpful during development, but probably not useful in
production. See if you can make this not warn in production.

> You can tell whether we're running in production with
> `process.env.NODE_ENV === 'production'`

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Patterns%20%F0%9F%A4%AF&e=06%3A%20Control%20Props&em=).
